To understand how we hear,
and how some common problems occur,
it helps to understand ear anatomy.
Your ear canal is connected to the
tympanic membrane, or eardrum,
which senses sound waves entering your ear.
Inside the ear canal,
wax is created to remove
dust particles from the air
before they reach the tympanic membrane.
But wax buildup can also prevent
sound waves from reaching it.
Using a Q tip can push the wax
in deeper and worsen the problem.
When sound waves do reach the tympanic membrane,
it vibrates,
which causes small bones in the middle of your ear,
called the ossicles,
to shake.
They may be blocked from moving
if an infection in your middle ear
causes a build up fluid and
bulging of the tympanic membrane.
The motion of the inner ear bones
produces pressure waves,
which set in motion tiny
hair fibers in the inner ear
or cochlea.
The inner ear hairs convert
their motion into electrical signals,
which are carried to the part of the brain
that perceives sound.
Listening to loud music
can shear the hair cells,
so that they tear and shrivel.
This is a primary cause of hearing loss,
especially when there is too much
noise in the environment.